# Qlik Hooks vs. RxQ vs. enigma.js

[Enigma.js](https://github.com/qlik-oss/enigma.js) is a Promise-based JavaScript library aimed at making WebSocket communication with the Qlik Sense engine easier to manage. This tool paved a way to access the Engine with front end web apps.

Enigma.js inspired another library, [RxQ](https://opensrc.axisgroup.com/rxq/docs/), that harnesses the power of Reactive programming using the [Observable](https://egghead.io/lessons/javascript-introducing-the-observable) pattern. Observable patterns (implemented in JavaScript via RxJS) allowed for a more declarative approach to communicating with the Qlik Engine API, and made complex state pattern development quicker to build.

While RxQ opens many doors for development with the Qlik Engine, it still requires a strong understanding of Reactive programming and Observable patterns - a steep learning curve for many developers new to this framework. The struggles of adopting these new ideas inspired a new framework: Qlik Hooks, aimed at making the Qlik Engine API more easily accessible.

While the Qlik Hooks library is meant to be an easier to learn method of accessing the Qlik Engine API, it is by no means intended to replace RxQ. For starters, Qlik Hooks is dependent on being run within a React framework application. If you want to communicate with the Engine outside of a web app, or even outside React for that matter, you will still need to utilize RxQ or Enigma (or a custom solution utilizing the JSON RPC protocol over WebSocket). We have targeted React because of its growing support for declarative state management through hooks, which provides a library for us to build upon for front-end web development. In the majority of Qlik Engine API projects we work on, they are attempting to interact with the Qlik Engine API from a front-end web application.
